# Time Synchronization from Amazon AWS

These days it's easy to take time synchronization for granted. Most new or modern systems comes with time synchronization already installed and configured. Even mobile phones does it automatically when they connect to the cellphone towers.

But how does this work, why do you need to care and and what does this announcement from AWS mean?

# How Does Time Synchronization Work?

This can be a very long explanation, but I rather opted for the short version, with sufficient links to more comprehensive resources for those interested in the detail. 

A good starting point is [the wikipedia page on the NTP protocol](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Network_Time_Protocol).

There are various RFC's, as can be seen by the Wikipedia page, that describe the technical details of the protocol.

Other great resources include "_[How Does NTP Work?](https://sookocheff.com/post/time/how-does-ntp-work/)_" by Kevin Sookocheff and "_[What Is NTP? A Beginner’s Guide to Network Time Protocol](https://www.galsys.co.uk/news/what-is-ntp-a-beginners-guide-to-network-time-protocol/)_" by Ben Telford.

In practical terms, however, it means that for most computer systems they need a Time Server to connect to, and by an implementation of the NTP protocol, the local time service will ensure the computer clock stays as accurate as possible, making micro adjustments throughout as required.

# Why Do You Need to Care?

There are cases in which an accurate system time is not that important. However, I would argue that most workloads and processing these days relay in some way or form on a reliable time source. If for nothing else, then at least for having accurate timestamps in the log files, especially if there are some form of audit log on the system.

In the processing of data, time may also play an important role. In some cases, data have to be processed by a certain deadline. How does the system know that this deadline has been reached? Also, when data is exchanged between systems, timestamps are often used and strange bugs can occur when some systems are not synchronized using NTP. Personally I have observed systems rejecting messages becaus the message timestamp was in the future.

Dealing with time is one thing, but today we also operate our systems on a global scale.

# Tags

internet, services, ntp, aws

<div id="disqus_thread"></div>
<script>
    /**
    *  RECOMMENDED CONFIGURATION VARIABLES: EDIT AND UNCOMMENT THE SECTION BELOW TO INSERT DYNAMIC VALUES FROM YOUR PLATFORM OR CMS.
    *  LEARN WHY DEFINING THESE VARIABLES IS IMPORTANT: https://disqus.com/admin/universalcode/#configuration-variables    */
    /*
    var disqus_config = function () {
    this.page.url = PAGE_URL;  // Replace PAGE_URL with your page's canonical URL variable
    this.page.identifier = PAGE_IDENTIFIER; // Replace PAGE_IDENTIFIER with your page's unique identifier variable
    };
    */
    (function() { // DON'T EDIT BELOW THIS LINE
    var d = document, s = d.createElement('script');
    s.src = 'https://nicc777.disqus.com/embed.js';
    s.setAttribute('data-timestamp', +new Date());
    (d.head || d.body).appendChild(s);
    })();
</script>
<noscript>Please enable JavaScript to view the <a href="https://disqus.com/?ref_noscript">comments powered by Disqus.</a></noscript>