# WSL Tweaks

I love Linux and would ideally prefer to work on a Linux system fulltime. However, most companies will force you to use MS Windows.

Thankfully, we now have [WSL](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/wsl/install) on Windows making it possible to still do the majority of work in Linux if you prefer.

However, WSL may end up using a lot of resources on Windows which make your system really slow and unresponsive. In most cases, WSL does not need a lot of resources and in cases where it may consume a lot of resources, you do have some options to limit that impact on the rest of the system.

But how would you know when this is a problem? Well, a good indicator is the `vmmem` process taking up a lot of memory and hammering your CPU.

The fix? Open a command prompt or powershell window in Windows, and run the following commands:

```shell
$ wsl --shutdown
$ notepad "$env:USERPROFILE/.wslconfig"
```

The latter command will open notepad where you will edit the file `~/.wslconfig` (in your Windows home directory).

In this file, add the following:

```text
[wsl2]
memory=3GB   # Limits VM memory in WSL 2 up to 3GB
processors=2 # Makes the WSL 2 VM use two virtual processors
```

You can obviously tweak these numbers for your own use case. For running Docker with a WSL backend and with the Kubernetes engine enabled, I found that 8GB RAM and 4 CPU cores to be the sweet spot to keep my system happy (I have a total of 32GB RAM and 2 cores available on this system).

Further reading:

* https://itnext.io/wsl2-tips-limit-cpu-memory-when-using-docker-c022535faf6f
* https://superuser.com/questions/1559170/how-can-i-reduce-the-consumption-of-the-vmmem-process
* [WSL Advanced Settings (Microsoft DOcumentation)](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/wsl/wsl-config)
