# Kustomize: Quick Intro

When it comes to explaining what `kustomize` is, I prefer the intro from [their GitHub repository](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kustomize):

> `kustomize` lets you customize raw, template-free YAML files for multiple purposes, leaving the original YAML untouched and usable as is.

The important points are this:

* You have an existing, working, manifest to deploy your resources in Kubernetes
* These manifests does not include some template language (like Helm charts1) - it basically deploys with `kubectl apply -f ....`
* There are specific items in these manifests you may want to adjust depending on environment, for example between EKS accounts you may want to target different ECR repositories for the image referenced by each account.

# Installation

Installation is super easy, with the following command working great on Linux based systems, installing it in te current working directory:

```shell
curl -s "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kubernetes-sigs/kustomize/master/hack/install_kustomize.sh"  | bash
```

You may want to manually move the binary to a more appropriate directory. On my own system I prefer these types of commands to all live in `~/opt/bin`, so I would issue the following command:

```shell
mv kustomize ~/opt/bin
```

A quick test to see if everything is working: `kustomize version` and the output should look something like this:

```text
{Version:kustomize/v4.5.4 GitCommit:cf3a452ddd6f83945d39d582243b8592ec627ae3 BuildDate:2022-03-28T23:12:45Z GoOs:linux GoArch:amd64}
```

# Quick Start

In a previous project I created called [`pyk8sdemo-app`](https://github.com/nicc777/pyk8sdemo-app), I have added a very basic example in the `kustomize` root directory `kubernetes_manifests/kustomization-demo/base`

There are several phrases with very specific meanings, like the term `root`, and you can find a [glossary online](https://kubectl.docs.kubernetes.io/references/kustomize/glossary/) that explains it perfectly.

In this example, in the `kubernetes_manifests/kustomization-demo/base` directory, you have your standard manifest files as well as the `kustomization.yaml` file.

The full file structure is listed below:

```text
.
├── base
│   ├── flask-demo-app-deployment.yaml
│   ├── flask-demo-app-namespace.yaml
│   ├── flask-demo-app-service.yaml
│   └── kustomization.yaml
└── overlays
    ├── full
    │   └── kustomization.yaml
    └── pod-only
        ├── delete-flask-demo-app-service.yaml
        └── kustomization.yaml
```

In the `base/kustomization.yaml` file, is just a simple reference to all the manifest files that make up the _default_ deployment. You can apply these manifests to a cluster and your application should deploy.

In the `overlays/` directory we get other directories, where each one signifies a specific customization or change based on the `base/` configurations. 

In this specific example, there are two deployment scenarios: a `full` deployment, which will basically just deploy the default manifests as-is, and a `pod-only` customization which effectively leaves out the `Service` from the default deployment.

These are very similar to the `kubernetes_manifests/troubleshooting-app.yaml` and `kubernetes_manifests/troubleshooting-app-pod-only.yaml` manifests, which you can also use.

# Deploying a scenario

Command listed below assume you are in the `kubernetes_manifests/kustomization-demo/` directory.

To deploy the default scenario, the command would be:

```shell
kustomize build overlays/full | kubectl apply -f -
```

To deploy the Pod only scenario, the following command can be used:

```shell
kustomize build overlays/pod-only | kubectl apply -f -
```

# Final thoughts

I still prefer [Helm charts](https://helm.sh/) to properly package and parameterize deployments, but sometimes it's overkill. Or perhaps you are just fine sticking to normal manifest files. Either way, `kustomize` is a really good way to cater for different deployment scenarios or environments without the need to use Helm or perhaps even other more sophisticated tools.

# Tags

kubernetes, cli, kustomize

<div id="disqus_thread"></div>
<script>
    /**
    *  RECOMMENDED CONFIGURATION VARIABLES: EDIT AND UNCOMMENT THE SECTION BELOW TO INSERT DYNAMIC VALUES FROM YOUR PLATFORM OR CMS.
    *  LEARN WHY DEFINING THESE VARIABLES IS IMPORTANT: https://disqus.com/admin/universalcode/#configuration-variables    */
    /*
    var disqus_config = function () {
    this.page.url = PAGE_URL;  // Replace PAGE_URL with your page's canonical URL variable
    this.page.identifier = PAGE_IDENTIFIER; // Replace PAGE_IDENTIFIER with your page's unique identifier variable
    };
    */
    (function() { // DON'T EDIT BELOW THIS LINE
    var d = document, s = d.createElement('script');
    s.src = 'https://nicc777.disqus.com/embed.js';
    s.setAttribute('data-timestamp', +new Date());
    (d.head || d.body).appendChild(s);
    })();
</script>
<noscript>Please enable JavaScript to view the <a href="https://disqus.com/?ref_noscript">comments powered by Disqus.</a></noscript>