# Exploring Kubernetes from within Kubernetes... with Python - PART 2

Part 1 is available [here](2022-04-10.md)

Part 1 was a "set the scene" kind of post and in the post I will explore the actual Python solution to gather some basic statistics from within the cluster.

Once again, keep in mind that this is not a "how to measure resources" blog post - there are far better tools for that. This is a way to understand the Python Kubernetes Client at the hand of a practical example.

## The goal

The goal for this post is a Python application with a REST API that will print the available CPU and Memory per Node as well as the committed CPU and Memory per Node.

The output data will be in JSON with the following basic structure (example output, showing 1 node only):

```json
{
    "Nodes": [
        {
            "NodeName": "node3",
            "CPU": {
                "Capacity": 2000,
                "Allocatable": 2000,
                "Requests": {
                    "InstrumentedValue": 750.0,
                    "Percent": 37.5
                },
                "Limits": {
                    "InstrumentedValue": 1500.0,
                    "Percent": 75.0
                }
            },
            "RAM": {
                "Capacity": 8344227840,
                "Allocatable": 8344227840,
                "Requests": {
                    "InstrumentedValue": 530579456.0,
                    "Percent": 6.358640561761075
                },
                "Limits": {
                    "InstrumentedValue": 1073741824.0,
                    "Percent": 12.868078923405813
                }
            }
        }
    ]
}
```

# Project Implementation

The Python code can be found on GitHub, is the (probably) funny names [pykles repository](https://github.com/nicc777/pykles).

The container is also already available on [Docker Hub](https://hub.docker.com/r/nicc777/pykles)

The focus of this blog post in the Kubernetes CLient implementation and perhaps I will do another blog post (or two) about the rest of the stack, like FastAPI.

In Part 1 I discussed the background and I also refer to my K3s Kubernetes cluster as described in an even earlier [blog post](2022-04-03.md).

## Deployment

To deploy the application, simply run the following:

```shell
kubectl create namespace pykles

kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/nicc777/pykles/main/kubernetes_manifests/pykles.yaml -n pykles
```

Once deployed, your resources should look something like this:

```text
NAME                                     READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
pod/pykles-deployment-7944474c57-phw2t   1/1     Running   0          50s

NAME                         TYPE        CLUSTER-IP      EXTERNAL-IP   PORT(S)    AGE
service/pykles-app-service   ClusterIP   10.43.122.237   <none>        8080/TCP   50s

NAME                                READY   UP-TO-DATE   AVAILABLE   AGE
deployment.apps/pykles-deployment   1/1     1            1           50s

NAME                                           DESIRED   CURRENT   READY   AGE
replicaset.apps/pykles-deployment-7944474c57   1         1         1       50s
```

But in order to test, we need to connect to the REST API. To simplify this process, the following command illustrate how to use the `kubectl` port forwarder:

```shell
kubectl port-forward pod/pykles-deployment-7944474c57-phw2t -n pykles 7081:8080
```

_**Note**_: Ensure you refer to the correct POD!

## Simple Testing of the REST end-point

We can now use `curl` to test:

```shell
curl http://localhost:7081/
```

Your output should look something like this:

```json
{"Nodes":[{"NodeName":"node1","CPU":{"Capacity":2000,"Allocatable":2000,"Requests":{"InstrumentedValue":0.0,"Percent":0.0},"Limits":{"InstrumentedValue":0.0,"Percent":0.0}},"RAM":{"Capacity":8344227840,"Allocatable":8344227840,"Requests":{"InstrumentedValue":73400320.0,"Percent":0.8796538326546942},"Limits":{"InstrumentedValue":178257920.0,"Percent":2.136302165018543}}},{"NodeName":"node2","CPU":{"Capacity":2000,"Allocatable":2000,"Requests":{"InstrumentedValue":500.0,"Percent":25.0},"Limits":{"InstrumentedValue":1000.0,"Percent":50.0}},"RAM":{"Capacity":8344227840,"Allocatable":8344227840,"Requests":{"InstrumentedValue":268435456.0,"Percent":3.217019730851453},"Limits":{"InstrumentedValue":536870912.0,"Percent":6.434039461702906}}},{"NodeName":"node3","CPU":{"Capacity":2000,"Allocatable":2000,"Requests":{"InstrumentedValue":750.0,"Percent":37.5},"Limits":{"InstrumentedValue":1500.0,"Percent":75.0}},"RAM":{"Capacity":8344227840,"Allocatable":8344227840,"Requests":{"InstrumentedValue":530579456.0,"Percent":6.358640561761075},"Limits":{"InstrumentedValue":1073741824.0,"Percent":12.868078923405813}}}]}
```

If you followed the instructions from the previous blog posts, you should now have statistics of three nodes.

# Diving into the Code

So now that we get some CPU and RAM statistics out of the cluster, let's see how that actually works.

All references to files will use the relative path to the files as they are organized in the project repository.

## Basic Project Structure

The project is really small and the basic structure looks like this:

```text
.
├── Dockerfile
├── kubernetes_manifests
│   └── pykles.yaml
├── LICENSE
├── MANIFEST.in
├── pyproject.toml
├── README.md
├── setup.cfg
└── src
    └── pykles
        ├── __init__.py
        ├── kubernetes_functions.py
        ├── models.py
        ├── pykles.py
        └── services.py
```

The Kubernetes specific integration I have all put into the file `src/pykles/kubernetes_functions.py` and I will mainly refer to this file for the Kubernetes functions.

## The Python Kubernetes Client

The Python Kubernetes client is available [on GitHub](https://github.com/kubernetes-client/python).

Personally I find the documentation difficult/odd and it takes some getting used to in order to properly navigate.

However, I have put into the source code links to the relevant documentation pages on GitHub, so hopefully that twill help.

The client can be installed via `pip3 install kubernetes`, should you want to do this manually.

### Authentication and Authorization

The following function will retrieve the credentials from the environment and return a client for `CoreV1Api` API:

```python
def get_v1_client():
    try:
        config.load_incluster_config()
        logger.debug('Kubernetes Config Loaded')
        return client.CoreV1Api()
    except:
        logger.error('EXCEPTION: {}'.format(traceback.format_exc()))
    raise Exception('Failed to load Kubernetes Config')
```

Now, my initial statement and the code that followed may seem simple and straight forward... but it's actually a little more complicated than it appears. Let's look a little deeper:

#### What does it mean to "Get credentials from the environment"

This application integrates to the Kubernetes API and will run "in-cluster" - meaning it will be running as a Pod in the cluster.

All requests to teh Kubernetes API must include a token. When you use your `kubectl` command, you also need to be authenticated. In the case of my lab environment, this token is in the `~/k3s.yaml` file that was created during the cluster creation process.

The `kubectl` command will use the `certificate-authority-data` for the cluster and ensure that the commands are all properly authorized. If you use a more general configuration file, you may have several clusters, and you will need to swtich context each time you need to work on a different cluster.

However, when you work "in-cluster", the authorization tokens need to be obtained from a `ServiceAccount` ([Kubernetes documentation](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/configure-service-account/)).

The `ServiceAccount`, `ClusterRole` and `ClusterRoleBinding` is all required to provide the application with the required credentials to interact with the Kubernetes API.

_**Important**_: In the demonstration project the permissions defined are equivalent to "super user", "root" or "administrator" permissions. I have done this in order to freely experiment with various calls in a Lab environment. If you ever need to develop such integration in a production cluster, you have to use more stricter permissions to limit your application to only the permissions it actually needs ([least privilege principle](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Principle_of_least_privilege)).

Finally, note that the command `config.load_incluster_config()` is specifically implementing the logic for Pods running "in-cluster". You will not be able to use this application to connect to another cluster. For example, you cannot run the application native on your development machine to connect to a remote cluster. To run the application outside the cluster, consider using `config.load_kube_config()` which uses your Kubernetes configuration from your local environment.

#### The API Client

There are more than one API client and it is therefore important to know which one you need. In fact, there are around 60 different clients - below is a shorter list:

* `CoreApi`
* `CoreV1Api` (the one we will use exclusively)
* `LogsApi`
* `AppsApi`
* `NodeV1Api`
* etc...

Depending on the integration you need, you need to pick the client. Each client, like `CoreV1Api` which we will use, only implement specific integration to the Kubernetes API. For example, the following are some actions methods implemented by `CoreV1Api`:

* `create_namespaced_pod`
* `delete_namespace`
* `list_namespaced_pod`
* `patch_namespaced_pod`
* `read_namespaced_pod`
* etc...

You should also start to see a pattern here... Each method implements a kind of [CRUD](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Create,_read,_update_and_delete) operation oin resources in Kubernetes. The operations are:

* `connect`
* `create`
* `delete`
* `list`
* `patch`
* `replace`

These actions, in the background, will translate to one of the Kubernetes API [request verbs](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/authorization/#determine-the-request-verb).

In summary, you need to determine the correct client to use based on the operation you need to perform.

In our example, we need to call the following methods:

* `list_node`
* `list_pod_for_all_namespaces`

When you search for these on the [kubernetes client README](https://github.com/kubernetes-client/python/tree/master/kubernetes), you will see both are part of the `CoreV1Api` client - hence we only need it.

### Making an API call

Let's look at the first part of one of the functions in our `src/pykles/kubernetes_functions.py` file:

```python
def get_all_pod_resource_utilization_stats(
    node_id: str,
    next_token: str=None
)->dict:
    # ... some lines omitted ...
    try:
        client = get_v1_client()
        if next_token is not None:
            response = client.list_pod_for_all_namespaces(
                field_selector='spec.nodeName={},status.phase!=Failed,status.phase!=Succeeded'.format(node_id),
                limit=100
            )
        else:
            response = client.list_pod_for_all_namespaces(
                field_selector='spec.nodeName={},status.phase!=Failed,status.phase!=Succeeded'.format(node_id),
                _continue=next_token,
                limit=100
            )
    # ... processing of the results in response ...
```

Whenever you "read" data, you probably won't know how much data is actually coming to you. Need a list of Pods? Well, how many pods are there? The API provides a way to process data in smaller junks and the size can be more or less controlled by the `limit` keyword which should be available for most "read" operations. In this example, we return a maximum of 100 pods at a time. Should there be more than 100, the response will include a string value in the property `response.metadata._continue` (if no additional data is available, this value will be `None`). So later in the function, we have this:

```python
# ...
        if response.metadata._continue is not None:
            results = get_all_pod_resource_utilization_stats(
                node_id=node_id,
                next_token=response.metadata._continue
            )
        # Here we get the response and ADD it to our existing result set
# ...
```

Other parameters can of course also be set, but what are they? Here is where the documentation in the GutHub format becomes a little bit more tricky to read. At the time of writing, I tried to compile the HTML documents from source, but I got the same result as on https://kubernetes.readthedocs.io/en/latest/ where pages like [this one](https://kubernetes.readthedocs.io/en/latest/kubernetes.test.html#kubernetes-test-test-core-v1-api-module) (the one we are interested in), just contains headings without any content.

The actual content [can be found here](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kubernetes-client/python/master/kubernetes/docs/CoreV1Api.md) in the raw Markdown format. It appears that the documentation compilation as per the GitHub README does not compile these Markdown files - that you have to do yourself.

Therefore, if you clone the [kubernetes Python client](https://github.com/kubernetes-client/python) repository, you can generate your own HTML version of the required page with the following command, assuming [pandoc](https://pandoc.org/) is installed on your system:

```shell
cd kubernetes/docs

pandoc --standalone CoreV1Api.md > CoreV1Api.html
```

You can now open the generated `CoreV1Api.html` in your favourite web browser.

The parts we are interested in is the `list_node` and `list_pod_for_all_namespaces` sections. In the documentation you will see an example implementation as well as a table of parameters with a short description of how it is used. In the implementation of the call we make to the `list_pod_for_all_namespaces` method, we use the `field_selector` parameter which has the following description:

> string: A selector to restrict the list of returned objects by their fields. Defaults to everything.

Still not very helpful...

But there is a "cheat" available to see an example of how this works and that is by using the `kubectl` command with some additional debugging enabled that will show the actual API calls:

```shell
kubectl -v=8 describe node node2
```

There is a lot of additional output, including the following line:

```text
I0416 14:42:19.171806  204656 round_trippers.go:432] GET https://10.0.50.170:6443/api/v1/pods?fieldSelector=spec.nodeName%3Dnode2%2Cstatus.phase%21%3DFailed%2Cstatus.phase%21%3DSucceeded&limit=500
```

_**Important**_: This, by the way, is generally how you can reverse engineer any `kubectl` command to the correct Python Client. In the example above, a call is made to the `/api/v1/pods` endpoint. If we search for this exact string [in the repository README](https://github.com/kubernetes-client/python/tree/master/kubernetes), we find that the endpoint belongs to the `CoreV1Api` class (client).

In fact, from the `kubectl` implementation we can see that you would typically list all nodes and then describe each node. Any additional API calls will also now be shown and you can therefore adapt similar flow if you need to.

What was important here is that we got an example of the parameter value for `field_selector` to use: `spec.nodeName%3Dnode2%2Cstatus.phase%21%3DFailed%2Cstatus.phase%21%3DSucceeded`. Keep in mind the following when reading the whole string:

* Everything after the `?` are input parameters
* Parameters are separated by the `&` character
* HTML escape characters can be used, known as [Percent Encoding](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Percent-encoding), for example `%3D` and `%2C` which translates to `=` and `,` respectively. `%21` will ytranslate to `!`.

Therefore, `spec.nodeName%3Dnode2%2Cstatus.phase%21%3DFailed%2Cstatus.phase%21%3DSucceeded` will translate to `spec.nodeName=node2,status.phase!=Failed,status.phase!=Succeeded` - and that is our parameter value in Python.

