# GitHub Codespaces vs GitPod: Which is Better?

My long wait for using GitHub Codespaces is finally over. I have used [GitPod](https://gitpod.io/workspaces) in the past, and I am using their Open Source plan giving me 50 hours a month for free. You can see all the [GitPod offerings or plans here.](https://gitpod.io/plans). 

GitHub Codespaces, on the other hand, is not free and the cheapest option is US$0.18 per hour while using and US$0.07 per GiB per month for storage (only charged when inactive). The smallest unit (2x Core with 4GB RAM) appears to have 32GB storage mounted of which about 18GB is available for your project. How much of this is actually used for billing is unclear for me.

Here is a quick comparison between my entry level GitPod (free) addition and GitHub Codespaces:

| Feature                             | GitPoD             | Github Codespaces            |
|-------------------------------------|--------------------|------------------------------|
| Current Plan                        | Open Source        | 4 Core                       |
| CPU Core Count                      | 16                 | 4                            |
| RAM                                 | 64                 | 8                            |
| Free Disk Space                     | 28                 | 18                           |
| Operating System                    | Ubuntu 20.04.4 LTS | Ubuntu 20.04.4 LTS           |
| Cost for first 50 hours             | Free               | US$18                        |
| Idle Cost for the rest of the month | NILL               | 46.90 (670 hours, for 1 GiB) |

To put the costs in perspective, GitPod Unlimited (the highest tier) is only US$35 and gives you up to 16 parallel workspaces. The only thing GitHub Codespaces has going for it, in my opinion, is it's integration with the rest of the GitHub environment, like secrets. So, for individuals, freelancers and such, GitPod seems to be the better option. GitHub Codespaces is probably better suited for the Enterprise - but it all will depend on your use cases.

Personally, I use GitPod when I'm mobile and when I only have my iPad Air with me. It works great, but honestly, it's not the desktop experience on such a small device. So for my occasional work, the GitPod option is still by far the best option. You really get a lot of bang for buck!

# Additional resources

* [Official Introduction](https://github.com/features/codespaces)
* [Official Documentation](https://docs.github.com/en/codespaces)

Video from Alex Ziskind with his initial impressions

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/vPigsZ-zk1g" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

# Tags

github, cloud. vscode, ide

<div id="disqus_thread"></div>
<script>
    /**
    *  RECOMMENDED CONFIGURATION VARIABLES: EDIT AND UNCOMMENT THE SECTION BELOW TO INSERT DYNAMIC VALUES FROM YOUR PLATFORM OR CMS.
    *  LEARN WHY DEFINING THESE VARIABLES IS IMPORTANT: https://disqus.com/admin/universalcode/#configuration-variables    */
    /*
    var disqus_config = function () {
    this.page.url = PAGE_URL;  // Replace PAGE_URL with your page's canonical URL variable
    this.page.identifier = PAGE_IDENTIFIER; // Replace PAGE_IDENTIFIER with your page's unique identifier variable
    };
    */
    (function() { // DON'T EDIT BELOW THIS LINE
    var d = document, s = d.createElement('script');
    s.src = 'https://nicc777.disqus.com/embed.js';
    s.setAttribute('data-timestamp', +new Date());
    (d.head || d.body).appendChild(s);
    })();
</script>
<noscript>Please enable JavaScript to view the <a href="https://disqus.com/?ref_noscript">comments powered by Disqus.</a></noscript>
