# Tech Nostalgia: Windows 98

I've been hard at work on another [personal project ](https://github.com/nicc777/acfop) using up a lot of time I would usually have for experimenting with various technologies and writing blogs.

However, this weekend I thought I would take a short break from said project and do something a little different. 

I have been trying to get a decent running instance of Windows 9x running for some time, but it seems that the modern virtual machine solutions like VMWare and VirtualBox does not really emulate really old hardware very well and as a result it is becoming increasingly hard to get really old operating systems running on these solutions. So, I set out to search for something that would emulate the older hardware a lot better. 

Searching for something so niche wasn't something I thought would yield great results - after all, how much of a demand is there for this kind of thing? Turns out, thankfully, I was wrong. There is a rather large and growing group of people into retro computing, and the need for a hardware-accurate emulator seems to have been a common problem this community share.

# Tags

nostalgia, windows98, pcem, emulation, emulators

<div id="disqus_thread"></div>
<script>
    /**
    *  RECOMMENDED CONFIGURATION VARIABLES: EDIT AND UNCOMMENT THE SECTION BELOW TO INSERT DYNAMIC VALUES FROM YOUR PLATFORM OR CMS.
    *  LEARN WHY DEFINING THESE VARIABLES IS IMPORTANT: https://disqus.com/admin/universalcode/#configuration-variables    */
    /*
    var disqus_config = function () {
    this.page.url = PAGE_URL;  // Replace PAGE_URL with your page's canonical URL variable
    this.page.identifier = PAGE_IDENTIFIER; // Replace PAGE_IDENTIFIER with your page's unique identifier variable
    };
    */
    (function() { // DON'T EDIT BELOW THIS LINE
    var d = document, s = d.createElement('script');
    s.src = 'https://nicc777.disqus.com/embed.js';
    s.setAttribute('data-timestamp', +new Date());
    (d.head || d.body).appendChild(s);
    })();
</script>
<noscript>Please enable JavaScript to view the <a href="https://disqus.com/?ref_noscript">comments powered by Disqus.</a></noscript>
