# Blog Progress and Lessons Learned

It's been a couple of days since I started a new blogging site. On [25 February](2022-02-25.md) I wrote about the tech stack employed and now after a couple of days of making a new post almost every day, I can reflect on how some aspects can be further improved.

First, I use AWS CLI to synchronize the compiled pages to an S3 bucket. You can see the actual script [here...](https://github.com/nicc777/nicc777-com-site/blob/main/site-src/build.sh). What I noticed is that each time this script runs, all the files are uploaded every time. In the beginning, this is not a bif deal, but I can see that once there is a couple of thousand posts and images and other artifacts, this may become less than ideal. So the first problem I would like to solve is think about how I can solve this problem. I don't have a solid idea yet, but I do feel that this is a worthy problem to solve to optimize the release process.

Secondly, and depending on the solution I come up with in the deployment optimization exercise, I may need to consider moving larger and more long term static content to a separate bucket. For example, all my photos I could move to a bucket called `static.nicc777.com`. Then again, I might use this bucket regardless of the outcome of the optimization... I am still undecided. But what I do know is that there are a number of artifacts that I want to keep long term, regardless of what happens with the site - thinks like photos. I have a feeling I may very well go this route in the end.

The embedding of [Disqus Comments](https://disqus.com/) and even Youtube videos was super easy. For now I will keep on using these embedding techniques to provide cool content without major complexity.

Obviously I will post final decisions in the near future and of course the implementation will be part of the repository should anyone else be interested to use it as well.

<div id="disqus_thread"></div>
<script>
    /**
    *  RECOMMENDED CONFIGURATION VARIABLES: EDIT AND UNCOMMENT THE SECTION BELOW TO INSERT DYNAMIC VALUES FROM YOUR PLATFORM OR CMS.
    *  LEARN WHY DEFINING THESE VARIABLES IS IMPORTANT: https://disqus.com/admin/universalcode/#configuration-variables    */
    /*
    var disqus_config = function () {
    this.page.url = PAGE_URL;  // Replace PAGE_URL with your page's canonical URL variable
    this.page.identifier = PAGE_IDENTIFIER; // Replace PAGE_IDENTIFIER with your page's unique identifier variable
    };
    */
    (function() { // DON'T EDIT BELOW THIS LINE
    var d = document, s = d.createElement('script');
    s.src = 'https://nicc777.disqus.com/embed.js';
    s.setAttribute('data-timestamp', +new Date());
    (d.head || d.body).appendChild(s);
    })();
</script>
<noscript>Please enable JavaScript to view the <a href="https://disqus.com/?ref_noscript">comments powered by Disqus.</a></noscript>
